>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 21:
THE BELGIAN CAPITAL OF BRUSSELS
IS ON LOCKDOWN AFTER OFFICIALS
WARN OF A POSSIBLE TERRORIST
ATTACK.
CAN POTENTIAL ISIS OPERATIVES BE
EFFECTIVELY TRACKED IN THE
UNITED STATES?
AND, THE NEW REALITIES OF BEING
YOUNG, FRENCH AND MUSLIM.
>> YOU KNOW, I'M FRENCH.
I FEEL FRENCH, MORE THAN EVER.
>> Thompson: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BRUSSELS, THE CAPITAL OF BELGIUM
AND THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION, IS ON A HIGH
SECURITY ALERT.
WITHOUT DISCLOSING SPECIFICALLY
WHY, THE BELGIAN GOVERNMENT
TODAY ANNOUNCED THE THREAT OF A
TERRORIST ATTACK THERE WAS
"SERIOUS AND IMMINENT."
THE BELGIUM ALERT COMES EIGHT
DAYS AFTER FRANCE SAW 130 PEOPLE
KILLED BY GUNMEN AND SUICIDE
BOMBERS WHO ATTACKED A STADIUM,
RESTAURANTS, AND A CONCERT HALL
IN PARIS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S HARI SREENIVASAN
IS IN PARIS AND JOINS US NOW
WITH MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
MEGAN.
POLICE SIRENS CONTINUE TO BLARE
AT TIMES ACROSS THE STREETS OF
PARIS.
NEXT DOOR IN BELGIUM, OFFICIALS
HAVE PUT THE CITY OF BRUSSELS, A
CITY OF A MILLION PEOPLE, ON
LOCKDOWN.
HEAVILY ARMED POLICE AND
SOLDIERS PATROLLED THE STREETS
OF BRUSSELS AND GUARDED SHOPS
THAT WERE OPEN.
THE METRO WAS CLOSED.
BELGIANS LARGELY HEEDED THE
GOVERNMENT'S WARNING TO NOT
GATHER IN CROWDS, AFTER PRIME
MINISTER CHARLES MICHEL
ANNOUNCED INTELLIGENCE POINTED
TO THE POSSIBILITY OF A PARIS-
STYLE ATTACK THERE.
>> (translated): OUR ANALYSIS
HAS LED US TO IDENTIFY MORE
PRECISELY EVENTS ATTENDED BY A
LOT OF PEOPLE, SHOPPING STREETS
AND SHOPPING CENTERS, PROTESTS
OR ANY EVENTS WITH A LARGE
CROWD.
THE GOVERNMENT IS ASKING THE
POPULATION TO BE PRUDENT AND
ALERT.
WE ALSO ASK FOR PEOPLE TO AVOID
ANY KIND OF PANIC.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S.
EMBASSY IN BELGIUM URGED
AMERICANS IN THE COUNTRY TO
"SHELTER IN PLACE AND REMAIN AT
HOME."
THE BELGIAN FEDERAL PROSECUTOR'S
OFFICE SAID TODAY INVESTIGATORS
FOUND WEAPONS DURING A SEARCH OF
A HOME OF ONE OF THREE PEOPLE
DETAINED IN CONNECTION WITH THE
PARIS ATTACKS.
BRUSSELS IS THE LAST KNOWN
RESIDENCE OF ABDELHAMID ABAAOUD,
THE SUSPECTED RINGLEADER OF THE
ATTACKS FOR THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP, OR ISIS.
A MANHUNT IS STILL UNDER WAY FOR
ONE OTHER SUSPECT IN THE PARIS
ATTACKS, BELGIAN SALAH ABDELSAM,
WHO IS BELIEVED TO HAVE CROSSED
BACK INTO THE COUNTRY ONE WEEK
AGO, HIS BROTHER HAVING BLOWN
HIMSELF UP DURING THE PARIS
ATTACKS.
TODAY, TURKEY DETAINED TWO
SYRIAN MEN AND ONE BELGIAN
SUSPECTED OF "AIDING AND
ABETTING" THE ISLAMIC STATE, AND
TURKISH MEDIA REPORTS SAY THE
BELGIAN MAY HAVE SCOUTED
LOCATIONS FOR THE PARIS ATTACKS.
IN PARIS, PARISIANS AND TOURISTS
CONTINUE TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE
130 PEOPLE KILLED, LEAVING
FLOWERS AND LIGHTING CANDLES
NEAR THE CONCERT HALL AND THE
CAFES WHERE SO MANY DIED WHILE
SIMPLY TRYING TO ENJOY A FRIDAY
NIGHT OUT.
HERE IN PARIS, THE PROSECUTOR'S
OFFICE SAID TODAY POLICE HAVE
RELEASED SEVEN OF THE EIGHT
PEOPLE TAKEN INTO CUSTODY
FOLLOWING THE RAID WEDNESDAY ON
A RESIDENCE WHERE POLICE KILLED
ABDELHAMID ABAAOUD, THE
SUSPECTED RINGLEADER OF THE
PARIS ATTACKS.
ONE PERSON ARRESTED REMAINS IN
CUSTODY.
IN THE UNITED STATES, F.B.I.
DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY SAYS HE IS
NOT AWARE OF ANY CREDIBLE
THREATS OF WHAT HE CALLS "PARIS-
TYPE" ATTACKS OR OF ANY U.S.
CONNECTIONS AMONG THE PARIS
ATTACKERS.
AT THE SAME TIME, COMEY SAYS THE
F.B.I. CURRENTLY HAS 900 OPEN
INQUIRIES INTO ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS IN THE HOMELAND,
AND FEDERAL CHARGES HAVE BEEN
BROUGHT AGAINST 69 PEOPLE FOR
ALLEGEDLY SUPPORTING ISIS.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS THE
CHALLENGES OF PREVENTING AN ISIS
ATTACK IN THE U.S. IS "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTER MATT APUZZO.
MATT, EARLIER THIS WEEK IN
EUROPE, THE HEAD OF EUROPOL SAID
THEY HAVE A WATCH LIST OF ALMOST
10,000 PEOPLE, THAT 2,000
EUROPEANS HAVE FLOWN BACK AND
FORTH TO SYRIA AND IRAQ OVER
THE LAST FEW YEARS.
THE NUMBER IS MUCH SMALLER IN
THE U.S. AND THOSE TRAVEL
ITINERARIES ARE LIKE RED FLAGS.
DOES THAT MAKE IT HARDER FOR
U.S. AUTHORITIES TO FIGURE OUT
WHO TO TARGET?
>> SURE.
IN THE YOUTH, THE PROBLEM THAT
ISIS POSES HERE IS ACTUALLY VERY
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT'S GOING ON
IN EUROPE.
THE REAL STRUGGLE FOR AMERICAN
LAW ENFORCEMENT ARE GUYS THEY
CALL V.M.E., HOMEGROWN VICE
PRESIDENT EXTREMISTS.
THEY HAVEN'T GONE OUT TO TAPE.
THEY'RE JUST DISAFFECTED ANGRY
PEOPLE WHO ARE LOOKING TO GLOM
ON TO SOMETHING, AND ISIS IS OUT
THERE WITH A VERY SLICK
PROPAGANDA MACHINE.
THEY'RE REALLY SPEAKING TO THE
SCHOOL SHOOTER CROWD.
THEY'RE SPEAKING TO GUYS WHO,
YOU KNOW, MAYBE IN A PREVIOUS
GENERATION MIGHT HAVE JOINED A
GANG OR DONE SOME OTHER
ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT SEEMS
LIKE A DIFFERENT SOCIAL MEDIA
STRATEGY THAN PERHAPS IN OTHER
PARTS OF EUROPE WHERE THEY'RE
TRYING TO RECRUIT PEOPLE TO GO
DOWN TO SYRIA.
THIS IS DIFFERENT FROM THE U.S.
WHERE.
>> THE STRATEGY HAS CHANGED FOR
ISIS.
I MEAN, I THINK THERE'S A
RECOGNITION THAT IT'S MUCH
HARDER TO GET PEOPLE ON TO A
PLANE IN THE UNITED STATES AND
GET THEM TO SYRIA, WASTE OF
PEOPLE OF MAYBE NINE A MONTH
PAST YEAR HAVE KIND OF SLOWED TO
A TRICKLE.
ISIS SEEMS MUCH MORE FOCUSED ON
TRYING TO INSPIRE PEOPLE HERE TO
TAKE UP ARMS, AND IF YOU DON'T
HAVE A GUN, USE A KNIFE; IF YOU
DON'T HAVE A KNIFE, USE YOUR
CAR TO COMMIT THESE SORT OF
SMALL ONE-OFF ACTS OF VIOLENCE,
AND DO IT IN ISIS' NAME.
ISIS DOESN'T CARE IF YOU WANT TO
DECLARE YOURSELF TO BE PART OF
THE MOVEMENT, THEY'LL TAKE IT.
THEY'LL TAKE CREDIT FOR IT AND
THEY'LL SUNDAY PROPAGANDA AROUND
ON IT.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU MENTIONED
THE SCHOOL SHOOTER CROWD.
IN YOUR STORY THERE WAS AN
INTERESTING DOUBLE STANDARD WE
HAVE FOR INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
OF HOW WE PERCEIVE WHETHER THEY
CAPTURE ISIS OR A SCHOOL
SHOOTER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND IT'S SOMETHING THAT REALLY
WEIGHS HEAVILY ON AMERICAN LAW
ENFORCEMENT, AND IT'S A DOUBLE
STANDARD THAT'S OBVIOUS WHEN YOU
TALK TO GUYS WHO DO THIS FOR A
LINK.
I MEAN, NOBODY HAD AN
EXPECTATION THAT THE F.B.I.
SHOULD HAVE STOPPED THE NEWTOWN
SCHOOL SHOOTER OR THE AURORA
THEATER SHOOTER OR THE
CHARLESTON SHOOTER IN THE BLACK
CHURCH BEFORE THEY OPENED FIRE.
THERE WAS EXPECTATION THEY WOULD
DETECT THIS AND THERE SHOULD
HAVE BEEN A TRAP SET.
BUT IF THOSE SAME ACTION WERE
DONE BY SOMEBODY WHO HAD BEEN
WATCHING ISIS VIDEOS, THEN IT
MIGHT HAVE BEEN AN INTELLIGENCE
FAILURE, AND IT WOULD BE, YOU
KNOW, MAYBE CONGRESSIONAL
HEARINGS AND THERE WOULD BE,
"WHY IS THE F.B.I. NOT DOING
ENOUGH?"
OR "WHY ISN'T OUR
COUNTER-TERRORISM TRIP WIRES
ENOUGH?"
THAT'S HARD.
THAT REALLY SPEAKS TO WHAT WE
CONSIDER TERRORIZING IN THE
UNITED STATES.
WE DON'T RESPOND IN THE SAME WAY
IN THE UNITED STATES IT A SCHOOL
SHOOTING AS WE DO IF SOMEBODY
OPENS FIRE IN A PUBLIC SPACE AND
SCREAMS ALLAHU AKBAR.
THAT'S A HARD THING TO BALANCE
WHEN YOU'RE IN THE
COUNTER-TERRORISM WORLD,
>> Sreenivasan: MATT APPUZO OF
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: BOTH GERMANY AND
FRANCE HAVE CLOSE TO FIVE
MILLION RESIDENTS OF MUSLIM
DESCENT.
THAT'S THE LARGEST
POPULATIONS IN WESTERN EUROPE.
BUT NOW THAT FRANCE HAS BEEN
VICTIMIZED BY HOMEGROWN
MUSLIM TERRORISTS, MANY YOUNG
FRENCH MUSLIM CITIZENS ARE
GRAPPLING WITH HOW THEY ARE
PERCEIVED.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE IS IN
PARIS, AND BRINGS US THIS
REPORT.
>> Reporter: LAST FRIDAY, 26-
YEAR-OLD ROHAN HOUSSEIN WAS
HAVING TEA AT A PERSIAN CAFE IN
PARIS' TENTH DISTRICT WHEN HE
AND HIS FRIENDS HEARD GUNFIRE.
>> A MAN CAME INTO THE CAFE.
HE WAS INJURED ON HIS ARM BY A
BULLET, AND HE STARTED TO SAY,
"COME ON, YOU HAVE TO HIDE RIGHT
NOW.
PEOPLE IS GETTING SHOT OVER
THERE."
>> Reporter: TERRORISTS HAD
STORMED THIS NEIGHBORHOOD, WHICH
DRAWS A YOUNG, DIVERSE CROWD
FROM ALL OVER THE FRENCH
CAPITAL.
>> THIS NEIGHBORHOOD IS REALLY
POPULAR, AND YOU CAN GO TO THE
THEATER, TO HAVE A LUNCH, TO
CHILL OUT WITH FRIENDS.
>> Reporter: THE ATTACKERS
STRUCK UNDER THE BANNER OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE, AND INVESTIGATORS
SAY MOST WERE FRENCH NATIONALS,
REOPENING THE COUNTRY'S
LONG-RUNNING DEBATE ABOUT WHAT
IT MEANS TO BE BOTH FRENCH AND
MUSLIM.
IT'S A DEBATE THAT RESONATES
WITH HOUSSEIN.
HE WAS RAISED BY A SYRIAN MUSLIM
FATHER AND A FRENCH CHRISTIAN
MOTHER.
>> IT'S A WEIRD FEELING, BECAUSE
IT'S LIKE BOTH PARTS OF ME ARE
FIGHTING AGAINST EACH OTHER, YOU
KNOW.
IT'S A CRAZY SITUATION, TO BE
HALF FRENCH-HALF SYRIAN IN
NOVEMBER 2015.
IT'S CRAZY.
BUT IT'S ALSO MAYBE A CHANCE TO
BE PROUD OF THIS IDENTITY.
>> Reporter: MANSOURIA MOKHEFI
IS AN ALGERIAN-BORN PROFESSOR
WHO SPECIALIZES IN THE MIDDLE
EAST AND NORTH AFRICA.
>> MANY MUSLIMS LOST THEIR LIVES
AMONG THE VICTIMS.
WE HAVE MANY MUSLIMS WHO WERE
THERE ATTENDING THE CONCERT,
SITTING AT THE TERRACES, BEING
PART OF THE PARISIAN LIFE.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS LAST
WEEK'S TERROR ATTACKS WERE A
STRIKE AGAINST THE FRENCH, BUT
ALSO AGAINST THOSE WHO'VE
EMBRACED BOTH THEIR FRENCH AND
MUSLIM IDENTITIES.
>> THEY ARE NOT TARGETING
SPECIFIC PEOPLE.
THEY JUST TARGETED EVERYBODY,
BECAUSE NOW THEY'RE WAGING THEIR
WAR AGAINST EVERYTHING THAT IS
FRENCH.
AND AMONG THE FRENCH, THEY'RE
NOT GOING TO DISCRIMINATE
PARTICULARLY BETWEEN MUSLIMS AND
NON-MUSLIMS.
>> Reporter: WE MET IMANE BATUT,
A 29-YEAR-OLD FRENCH MUSLIM AT A
PARIS RAILWAY STATION AS SHE WAS
ABOUT TO TAKE A BUSINESS TRIP.
>> (translated): I'M A VERY,
VERY MODERATE MUSLIM.
I DON'T PRAY.
I DON'T DO A LOT OF THINGS, BUT
I BELIEVE IN GOD.
THAT'S IT.
BUT THAT DOESN'T STOP ME FROM
LIVING, FROM GETTING A DRINK ON
A TERRACE, TO TRAVEL, TO GO OUT.
THAT'S ME.
THAT'S NOT MY RELIGION.
>> Reporter: DO YOU FEEL THAT
THIS ATTACK MEANS PEOPLE LOOK AT
YOU DIFFERENTLY?
>> (translated): I HOPE NOT,
BUT I THINK SO.
>> Reporter: FOUR ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST ATTACKS IN ONE YEAR
IN FRANCE: THE SHOOTINGS AT
CHARLIE HEBDO MAGAZINE IN
JANUARY; A BEHEADING AT A FRENCH
FACTORY IN JUNE; A THWARTED
ATTACK ON A PARIS-BOUND TRAIN IN
AUGUST; AND LAST WEEK'S MASSACRE
HAVE ALL CHANGED THE WAY MUSLIMS
ARE PERCEIVED HERE.
>> THERE HAS ALWAYS BEEN A
RELUCTANCE TO ACCEPT THE FRENCH
FROM MUSLIM ORIGIN AS TOTALLY
FRENCH.
BUT IT'S FAIR TO SAY THAT SINCE
CHARLIE HEBDO, THIS FEELING HAS
WIDENED CONSIDERABLY.
>> Reporter: THIS MOSQUE IN
PARIS' 19th DISTRICT, ONE OF THE
CITY'S LARGEST MUSLIM ENCLAVES,
IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY HERE IS
GROWING AND NEEDS MORE SPACE.
THE MOSQUE'S PRESIDENT, 53-YEAR-
OLD AHMED OUALI, SAYS YOUNG
FRENCH MUSLIMS, THOSE WHO FEEL
INTEGRATED AND THOSE WHO DON'T,
STRUGGLE WITH QUESTIONS OF
IDENTITY.
>> (translated): IN TERMS OF
YOUNG PEOPLE, YOU DO HAVE A
CATEGORY WHO ARE REALLY ASKING
THEMSELVES QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR
IDENTITIES, THEIR RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE COUNTRY THEY LIVE IN,
THE COUNTRY THEY WERE BORN IN.
THE WORST ERROR IS TO BE IN
DENIAL, TO NOT RECOGNIZE THIS.
>> Reporter: OUALI BELIEVES
ADDRESSING THESE IDENTITY ISSUES
IS A KEY STEP IN STOPPING
RADICALISM.
>> (translated): THOSE WHO'VE
ALREADY GONE OVER THE EDGE, IT'S
TOO LATE.
THEY'VE ALREADY GONE OVER THE
EDGE.
TO GET THEM BACK, IT MIGHT BE
POSSIBLE.
BUT MORE IMPORTANTLY, HOW DO WE
GET THE ONES WHO ARE ABOUT TO GO
OVER THE EDGE TO MAKE SURE THEY
DON'T?
ON THAT, THERE'S AN URGENT JOB
TO DO, TO RESPOND TO THEIR
ANXIETY AND QUESTIONS.
>> Reporter: MOKHEFI BELIEVES
FRANCE MUST ADDRESS ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY, ESPECIALLY IN THE
POORER "BANLIEUES," OR SUBURBS,
TO MAKE ALL MUSLIMS FEEL PART OF
FRENCH LIFE.
>> FRANCE HAS TO UNDERTAKE A
SERIOUS SELF-EXAMINATION IN
ORDER TO ADDRESS ITS LONG
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE ARAB AND
MUSLIM WORLD.
>> Reporter: THAT RELATIONSHIP
IS ON ROHAN HOUSSEIN'S MIND.
HE STILL HAS RELATIVES IN SYRIA
TRYING TO FLEE THAT COUNTRY'S
BRUTAL CIVIL WAR.
FRANCE'S CAMPAIGN OF AIR STRIKES
AGAINST ISIS POSITIONS IN SYRIA,
STEPPED UP IN THE DAYS FOLLOWING
THE PARIS ATTACKS, HAS HIM
WORRIED, AS DOES THE TALK OF
CLOSING BORDERS.
>> SO IT'S INSANE TO PUT BLAME
ON THE REFUGEES, BUT MAYBE IT'S
ANOTHER ANSWER TO FEAR.
PEOPLE DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
HAPPENED, SO THEY HAVE SOMEONE
TO BLAME, AND IT'S THE REFUGEES.
>> Reporter: STILL THE BACKLASH
DOESN'T MAKE HOUSSEIN FEEL ANY
LESS PROUD OF HIS SYRIAN FRENCH
IDENTITY.
>> I'M FRENCH, I FEEL FRENCH
MORE THAN EVER, BUT I'M SO PROUD
OF MY ROOTS, OF MY SYRIAN ROOTS,
BECAUSE IT MAKES ME SOMEONE
MAYBE DIFFERENT, MAYBE SPECIAL.
SO I'M VERY PROUD OF MY
IDENTITY.
>> Thompson: TAKE A LOOK BACK
AT MY REPORT FROM FRANCE ON THE
TENSIONS BETWEEN CHRISTIANS AND
MUSLIMS IN THE CITY OF
MARSEILLE.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Thompson: AUTHORITIES IN THE
WEST AFRICAN NATION OF MALI SAY
ARMED ISLAMIC TERRORISTS KILLED
19 PEOPLE IN YESTERDAY'S ATTACK
ON A RADISSON HOTEL IN THE
CAPITAL CITY OF BAMAKO.
AMONG THE VICTIMS WERE HOTEL
GUESTS FROM RUSSIA, CHINA,
BELGIUM, ISRAEL, AND ONE
AMERICAN: 41-YEAR-OLD ANITA
DATAR, A MOTHER OF A
SEVEN-YEAR-OLD BOY, FROM
MARYLAND.
SHE WAS A GLOBAL HEALTH WORKER
WHO PREVIOUSLY VOLUNTEERED FOR
THE PEACE CORPS.
AFTER A SEVEN-HOUR STANDOFF,
MALIAN SOLDIERS KILLED BOTH
ATTACKERS, WHO HAD BEEN HOLDING
170 PEOPLE AS HOSTAGES.
A GROUP LINKED TO AL QAEDA HAS
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE
TO DISCUSS THIS IS "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" REPORTER DREW HINSHAW,
WHO IS IN GHANA, JUST SOUTH OF
MALI.
DREW, YOU CAN TELL US, WHAT'S
THE LATEST ON THE INVESTIGATION
INTO THIS ATTACK?
>> WELL, TWO GROUPS THAT WERE
BOTH ALIGNED WITH AL QAEDA BUT
COMPETED AMONGST THENSELVES HAVE
TAKEN CREDIT FOR IT.
ONE IS AL QAEDA IN THE ISLAM, A
DECADES OLD GROUP BASED IN
NORTHERN MALI.
THE OTHER IS A GROUP COMMANDED
BY MUCITAL ERR MUKTAR, THOSE TWO
GROUPS HAVE TAKEN CREDIT FOR IT.
IT SEEMS CREDIBLE.
A FLAG FROM ONE OF THE GROUPS IS
FOUND ON THE PREMISES.
AL QAEDA LEADERS IN THE COUNTRY
HAVE BEEN PLANNING ATTACKS FOR
WEEKS IF NOT MONTHS.
THAT SEEMS TO BE LEGITIMATE.
I KNOW A LOT OF PEOPLE RIGHT
AFTER THE FACT THOUGHT IS THIS
RELATED TO PARIS?
BUT THE AL QAEDA WAR AGAINST
FRANCE HAS BEEN GOING ON FOR
QUITE SOME TIME
>> Thompson: CAN YOU JUST TELL
US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THAT?
>> FOR ROUGHLY A DECADE,
AL QAEDA MADE ITS MONEY IN THIS
PART WORLD BY KIDNAPPING
EUROPEANS, AND THE FRENCH WERE
A BIG PART OF THAT.
IN 2010, AL QAEDA BEHEADED A
FRENCH AID WORKER IN A WAY THAT
KIND OF FORETOLD ISIS.
THE PRESIDENT OF FRANCE LASHED
OUT AND SAID WE'RE AT WAR WITH
AL QAEDA AND AL QAEDA RESPONDED
THAT WE'RE GOING TO TAKE YOU TO
THE GATES OF HELL, AND THERE WAS
SOME KIND OF BACK AND FORTH.
IN 2012, AL QAEDA CONQUERED THE
NORTH OF MALI, WHICH IS A HUGE,
VAST TERRAIN.
AND IN JANUARY, 2013, FRANCE
INTERVENED TO TRY TO STOP THAT
AND TRY TO RESCUE SMALL TOWNS
LIKE TIMBUKTU FROM THE AL QAEDA
MILITANTS.
EVER SINCE THEN, THEY HAVE BEEN
KILLING QUITE A LOT OF THEM WITH
AIR STRIKES.
AND JIHADISTS HAVE BEEN STRIKING
BACK.
BOKO HARAM KIDNAPPED A
FRENCH FAMILY.
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF KIDNAPPING
>> Thompson: THERE WAS ALSO A
BOKO HARAM ATTACK IN CAMEROON
TODAY.
WHAT DOES THIS TELL US ABOUT HOW
COMPLEX THE FIGHT IS AGAINST
ISLAMIC EXTREMISM IN AFRICA?
>> IT'S A BIT OF WHACK-A-MOLE
HERE.
FRENCH TROOPS ARE IN CENTRAL
AFRICA, IN CHAD, THEY'RE IN THE
IVORY COAST.
THERE'S A BASE IN SENEGAL, ALL
OVER THE NORTH OF BALI.
THIS IS A HUGE, VAST DISTANCE,
AND IT'S REALLY HARD FOR ME TO
SEE HOW FRANCE OR EVEN A SMALL
NUMBER OF WESTERN COUNTRIES CAN
POLICE THE WORLD'S LARGEST
DESERT.
>> Thompson: DREW HINSHAW OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANK
YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, TOO.
>> Thompson: REFUGEES FROM
SYRIA'S 4.5-YEAR CIVIL WAR
COMPRISE HALF THE ESTIMATED
900,000 TO A MILLION MIGRANTS
AND REFUGEES WHO HAVE ENTERED
EUROPE THIS YEAR.
BUT ALMOST FOUR MILLION SYRIAN
REFUGEES HAVE SETTLED IN
COUNTRIES NEIGHBORING SYRIA--
TURKEY, JORDAN, AND LEBANON.
IN LEBANON, IN ADDITION TO THE
MASSES OF SYRIANS COMING OVER
THE BORDER, THERE HAS BEEN A
SPILLOVER OF VIOLENCE, AND THAT
WAS THE CASE AGAIN THIS WEEK.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: JUST ONE DAY BEFORE
ISIS MILITANTS CARRIED OUT THE
PARIS ATTACKS, A DOUBLE SUICIDE
BOMBING BY ISIS KILLED 43 PEOPLE
IN A RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD OF
LEBANON'S CAPITAL OF BEIRUT.
REMCO ANDERSEN, THE MIDDLE EAST
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE DUTCH
NEWSPAPER "DE VOLKSKRANT"
REPORTED FROM THE SCENE.
I SPOKE TO HIM BY SKYPE.
>> WHAT WE SAW WERE LOCAL YOUTH,
LEBANESE YOUTH, DRAGGING AWAY--
I SAW AT LEAST THREE CASES OF
THIS HAPPENING-- SYRIANS WHO
HAPPENED TO BE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
AND WHEN I ASKED THE GUY WHY, HE
SAID, YOU KNOW, THE PEOPLE WHO
MAKE THAT BOMB GO OFF ARE ISIS,
AND ISIS COMES FROM SYRIA, SO
EVERY SYRIAN IS NOW AT TARGET.
>> Reporter: ANDERSON SAYS SUCH
RETALIATION AND SCAPEGOATING
IS COMMON AFTER BOMBINGS INSIDE
LEBANON.
THERE HAVE BEEN MORE THAN A
DOZEN SUCH ATTACKS IN THE PAST
TWO YEARS.
>> THESE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
THAT HAPPEN AFTER A BOMBING LIKE
THAT, AND IT JUST SHOWS HOW
TENSIONS AND RESENTMENT BETWEEN
DIFFERENT GROUPS HERE ARE ONLY
GOING TO INCREASE.
>> Reporter: THIS SMALL COUNTRY
OF 4.5 MILLION PEOPLE HAS THE
WORLD'S LARGEST CONCENTRATION OF
SYRIAN REFUGEES PER CAPITA.
MORE THAN A MILLION REFUGEES,
WHICH MEANS ONE IN EVERY FOUR
PEOPLE IN LEBANON IS FROM SYRIA.
>> IT'S LIKE THE EQUIVALENT OF
HAVING 80 MILLION REFUGEES COME
TO THE UNITED STATES.
>> Reporter: AMAL MUDALLALI, AN
ADVISOR TO LEBANON'S FORMER
PRIME MINISTER AND NOW A SCHOLAR
AT THE WILSON CENTER, SAYS THE
REFUGEE INFLUX HAS STRAINED A
CASH-STRAPPED GOVERNMENT THAT
HAS BEEN UNABLE TO PICK UP
GARBAGE REGULARLY OR KEEP THE
ELECTRICITY ON.
>> THEY CAME TO AN AREA THAT
ALREADY HAS AN INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT CANNOT HANDLE EVEN ITS OWN
POPULATION.
THIS IS A BIG, BIG PROBLEM FOR
LEBANON, BECAUSE LEBANON IS A
SMALL COUNTRY; LEBANON HAS
LIMITED RESOURCES.
>> Reporter: LEBANON DOESN'T
HAVE SYRIAN REFUGEE CAMPS, SO
MOST ARRIVING FAMILIES LIVE IN
DILAPIDATED SINGLE ROOM
APARTMENTS AND MAKESHIFT TENT
COMMUNITIES.
>> THIS PROBLEM IS AT THE
BREAKING POINT.
>> Reporter: MUDALLALI SAYS THE
ANTI-REFUGEE RHETORIC NOW COMING
FROM EUROPE AND THE UNITED
STATES COULD MAKE THE PROBLEM
WORSE FOR LEBANON IF
INTERNATIONAL AID DRIES UP, AND
THE REFUGEES HAVE NO PLACE ELSE
TO GO.
>> THIS SENDS A MESSAGE TO THE
REGION THAT THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY DOES NOT WANT TO HOLD
ITS RESPONSIBILITY AND DON'T
WANT TO HELP WITH THIS PROBLEM.
THIS IS A BIG PROBLEM FOR THE
REGION TO ACCEPT, ESPECIALLY FOR
THE PEOPLE WHO CANNOT HANDLE IT
ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: MUDALLALI AND
REPORTERS IN LEBANON DESCRIBE
THE GOVERNMENT AS
"DYSFUNCTIONAL" AND ILL-EQUIPPED
TO HANDLE THE REFUGEES.
LEBANON HAS NOT HAD A PRESIDENT
FOR MORE THAN A YEAR OR HELD
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS FOR SIX
YEARS.
>> THE LEBANESE POPULATION HAS
BEEN TOLERANT OF ALL OF THIS, I
THINK, AMAZINGLY TOLERANT,
CONSIDERING HOW MANY REFUGEES
ARE HERE.
>> Reporter: MATTHEW FISHER, A
REPORTER FOR CANADA'S "NATIONAL
POST," SAYS LEBANON HAS BACKED
AWAY FROM ITS OPEN-DOOR
POLICY WITH SYRIA, TIGHTENING
ITS BORDERS WITH SYRIA AND
SUSPENDING REGISTRATIONS FOR NEW
REFUGEES.
>> THE ONES IN THE MIDDLE EAST
ARE REALLY POOR; THEY DON'T HAVE
THE MONEY TO PAY SMUGGLERS TO
GET TO EUROPE.
THESE REALLY ARE HARD-SCRABBLE
FOLK WITH NO OTHER OPTIONS.
>> Reporter: FISHER SAYS HE'S
OBSERVED FRICTION BETWEEN
LEBANESE CITIZENS AND SYRIAN
REFUGEES WHO ARE WILLING TO WORK
FOR 25% OF THE PAY A LEBANESE
WOULD.
HE SAYS MANY REFUGEES SAY THEY
FLED PERSECUTION BY SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
>> I'VE MET FIREMEN WHO SAID
THEY HAD TO LEAVE, BECAUSE THEY
REFUSED TO FIRE WATER CANNONS
FULL OF ACID AT PROTESTERS IN
DAMASCUS.
>> Reporter: WITH A HUGE BACKLOG
OF ASYLUM REQUESTS IN EUROPE,
THE PARIS ATTACKS MAY LEAVE MORE
SYRIANS IN LEBANON IN LIMBO.
>> EVERY SINGLE REFUGEE SAID TO
ME "THIS CHANGES THE GAME FOR
US.
WE ARE ALREADY IN A VERY
DIFFICULT POSITION, AND NOW WE
ARE IN A WORSE POSITION.
THE LEBANESE ARE GOING TO REGARD
US AS TERRORISTS.
ANY PLACE THAT WE MIGHT LIKE TO
RESETTLE IN, IN NORTH AMERICA
AND IN EUROPE, WILL NOW HAVE
ANOTHER REASON NOT TO BE
GENEROUS AND ALLOW US IN."
>>THIS IS PBS NEWHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA IS CALLING FOR COMPASSION
FOR REFUGEES.
CONTINUING HIS TEN-DAY TRIP
OVERSEAS, IN KUALA LUMPUR,
MALAYSIA, TODAY THE PRESIDENT
VISITED WITH CHILDREN AT A
REFUGEE CENTER THAT HAS TAKEN IN
MUSLIM REFUGEES FROM MYANMAR.
>> THEY ARE JUST LIKE OUR KIDS.
AND THEY DESERVE LOVE AND
PROTECTION AND STABILITY AND AN
EDUCATION.
>> Thompson: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
DEFENDED HIS ADMINISTRATION'S
PLAN TO ALLOW 10,000 SYRIAN
REFUGEES TO RESETTLE IN THE U.S.
AFTER THEY UNDERGO BACKGROUND
CHECKS.
>> THE NOTION THAT SOMEHOW WE
WOULD BE FEARFUL OF THEM, THAT
OUR POLITICS WOULD SOMEHOW LEAVE
US TO TURN OUR SIGHTS AWAY FROM
THEIR PLIGHT, IS NOT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BEST OF
WHO WE ARE.
>> Thompson: THE PRESIDENT
RETURNS TO WASHINGTON MONDAY
AND HOSTS FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE AT THE WHITE
HOUSE, TUESDAY.
TWO MONTHS AFTER BEING DECLARED
"EBOLA FREE," THE WEST AFRICAN
NATION OF LIBERIA HAS REPORTED
THREE NEW CASES OF THE DEADLY
DISEASE.
THE EBOLA OUTBREAK THAT BEGAN IN
WEST AFRICA TWO YEARS AGO HAS
KILLED MORE THAN 11,000 PEOPLE,
WITH THE MOST FATALITIES IN
LIBERIA.
17,000 PEOPLE WERE INFECTED AND
SURVIVED.
UNITED AUTO WORKERS HAVE A NEW
CONTRACT WITH ALL THREE OF
AMERICA'S BIGGEST AUTO MAKERS.
THE U.A.W. NARROWLY RATIFIED A
FOUR-YEAR CONTRACT WITH FORD
LAST NIGHT THAT RAISES WAGES AND
OFFERS SIGNING BONUSES FOR
53,000 WORKERS AT 22 PLANTS.
THE "YES" VOTE CAME JUST HOURS
AFTER THE U.A.W. RATIFIED A
SIMILAR FOUR-YEAR PACT WITH
GENERAL MOTORS.
THE U.A.W. AND CHRYSLER-- NOW
KNOWN AS "FIAT CHRYSLER"--
REACHED A DEAL LAST MONTH.
>> Thompson: COMING UP ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND TOMORROW,
CONTINUING COVERAGE OF EVENTS IN
EUROPE FOLLOWING LAST WEEK'S
TERROR ATTACKS.
AND A REPORT ON A FRENCH
MAGAZINE HELPING CHILDREN
UNDERSTAND THE PARIS ATTACKS
THROUGH CARTOONS.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.